on the mountain is the Eternal City of
anteriori the place where there are no
secrets and while the citizens do not
smile so much they hardly frown either
jewels and objects of great worth lie in
the streets for there is no theft where
there are no secrets and there are no
secrets in anteriori long ago during the
war of magical technology the city
sheltered a great wizard and in return
for the city's kindness the wizard
Enchanted the water of interior such
that one need only stare into the
reflection of a puddle or wash basin and
ask after a personal Place one should
like to see and be shown that thing in
its entirety it's not spying spying is
an exclusive activity and since anyone
can watch anyone this is simply how the
anterians live they have no word for
secrecy life was turbulent at first the
whispered slight to the bath house the
swindles of the marketplace suddenly
watchable for all plus crime rings and
crooked politicians could be listened in
on at the moment's notice illicit love
affairs observed by anyone sufficiently
voyeuristic but the was made recent
Generations have grown up with no
concepts of concealment and do not seem
to suffer for it everything is visible
in the water even the most mundane acts
the brushing of one's teeth the Brewing
of one's tea is performed with attention
and flare for anyone and everyone may be
watching there is nothing hidden every
eye is all seeing and all
but anteriori's transparency is not for
everyone and for those who cannot bear
such a way of life far below by the
ocean swaddled always in fog is the
Eternal City of tinagrat the place where
there are only Secrets the citizens
don't frown so much but they hardly
smile either possessions are many and
doors are unlocked since there is no
desire unfulfilled in tinagrad and there
is no thefts where there is no desire
unfulfilled for it was here long ago the
great wizard first went for shelter and
was refused and to thank the people of
tinagrass for their apathy he returned
to the conclusion of the war and
Enchanted the water here too the wet fog
that permeates every street and house
the snow that thaws come spring though
while the water in tinagrad sees all
citizens have no access to its
omniscient Visions there is only one
Watcher out of the bedrooms wear glasses
on nightstands listen of those mumbled
Untold Secrets the Tiner gradients admit
in their sleep down the cobbled stones
where the puddles watch of land disputes
and unrequited love to the harbor where
the ocean silently records of overpriced
fish and drunken Barb rules out into the
bay where there resides a great Kraken
who watches the Kraken never sleeps
never falters his mind unjudging as a
seismograph and the Kraken is very
hungry and its favorite meal is Secrets
as delivered by the water to its
unblinking eyes the secrets of tinagrat
each impulse and desire of each citizen
such that they may be met if favorable
to the market or suppressed if not such
that at the slightest hint of
eccentricity citizens may be placed
under heightened surveillance such that
none need ever fear or want and in
return for this miracle of constant
safety and satisfaction all the Kraken
requires is a little knowledge and all
it wants to know is everything give me
your tired thoughts your poor decisions
your huddled missives yearning to be
free who have you been going to bed with
who would you like to go to bed with
thinking of starting a family thinking
of cutting off your family preferred
brand of breakfast cereal least favorite
season what does home mean to you and if
the miracle should falter for a second
and a citizen-like catch sight of a
great hungry eye peering from the water
and cry out these are secrets my secrets
and my secrets are all I have the Kraken
only replies you ungrateful little
insect for what pretty things I have
sold you what peace times I have
delivered you what love I have shown you
what
is privacy for how do we resist the
increasingly aggressive attempts to
remove it from us and is this video
sponsored by an easy to use and reliable
VPN
[ __ ] no it is not if you don't live
alone but get the chance to sometime I
would recommend it because you can
constantly eat junk food without shame
become entirely nocturnal and discover
the true meaning of independent living
oh yeah where's your toilet regime now
mum but living alone is a pretty recent
phenomenon just sleeping alone is a
pretty recent phenomenon even for the
historically Rich privacy is an
invention we made that [ __ ] up but how
do we get here well for the first few
hundred thousand years of our time on
this watery spaceship it is unlikely
there were many loners for
hunter-gatherers going it alone probably
meant death because strength in numbers
was about the only trick that caps Us
Alive we were social by necessity and we
didn't do walls yet so other than the
confines of your own mind how could you
have privacy in that social
configuration what was the most mostest
game-changing human invention fire the
transistor all pretty rad yes but the
wall is going to be up there in the top
five at least we've been doing walls for
about 23 000 years now the oldest one
we've found being in Greece of course
it's grease it's always Greece and not
only do walls signify property and
property is a pretty weird idea if
you've never heard of it before first
person to get the land gets the land
forever why but it also means that
security means castles means established
power structures and it's only so long
before Walls Start to mean privacy and
that was more or less codified for the
first time we know of by the Greeks
because it's always the Greeks isn't it
and the distinction between the polis
and the Oikos the police being public
life politics she eat it outside really
and the Oikos your house your family
life [ __ ] you did inside really but even
then in most Greek tragedies the only
thing worse than getting executed was
being alone being exiled still our
ancestors understood privacy of the mind
just fine as in Secrets the Chinese
managed to keep the particulars of silk
production a secret for over a thousand
years by making you dead if you blab to
anyone then there was Greek Fire because
it's always the [ __ ] Greeks isn't it
a flammable slime used by the byzantines
during battle yeah that's right a 7th
century flamethrower and the secret of
its composition was so well kept we
still don't really know what the hell it
was today also the legend goes that when
Genghis Khan dies his funeral escort
kept his burial site a secret by
murdering anyone they passed on the way
there bit heavy-handed but points for
execution
literally literally
I long to die for the next ages us
Europeans at least did pretty much
everything under the Gaze of someone
else while at home eating weeping and
sleeping it's how we built our houses it
wasn't until the 17th century that some
genius thought to invent an entire room
for the bed the bedroom if you will but
beds themselves were crazy expensive
most homes could only afford a single
bed shared by family and guests which
meant not only did you get to witness
your nearest and dearest sleeping but
all the other activities that might
occur in a bedroom and while there
wasn't really a concept of medieval
privacy either there were ways to obtain
a little alone time like pissing off the
church and getting excommunicated big
fun or cutting off heads for a living
working as an executioner was so
shameful you wouldn't be invited into
others homes couldn't enter churches and
had to live on the fringes of town if
privacy is the right to be let alone
then along with monks executioners were
arguably kind of the pioneers of
something beginning to sound like modern
privacy but it would take a while yet in
the early 1900s Abigail Roberson one day
noticed a photo of herself on a poster
advertising flower she didn't remember
endorsing any flower so she sued the
company in question for using her
likeness without her permission she won
the case however the defendants appealed
claiming they hadn't taken anything of
worth from her and and they won the
appeal the chief judge writing actually
she should be touched as the ad was
quote a compliment to her beauty aha but
a pleasant surprise the public was
pissed at the ruling maximum pissed
resulting not too long after in the
first instance of legislation forbidding
using ones likeness without their
permission the beginning of modern
privacy really ironically the chief
judge we just mentioned who ruled
against her and said she should be
stoked because she was pretty and shut
up would run for president in a few
years and after getting snapped
constantly by photographers waxed at
Great length about how it was an
invasion of his privacy Abigail Roberson
reminded him in a letter in the New York
Times but you said there is no right to
privacy not so fun when it's being done
to you a what a [ __ ] and in just a few
decades Jesus Christo Things Are about
to get weirder because by now it's the
1960s computers are rather massive
trousers are rather silly and the cold
war is heating up the US Department of
Defense is interested in distributing
information across computers in case one
Link in the chain let's say breaks down
a bit enter are pronounce the first
packet switch Network and grandfather of
the modern internet and the first
message ever sent over arpanet from UCLA
to Stanford Research Institute was
supposed to be login however the system
fell over after two letters meaning the
internet's first message to the world
was low as in lo and behold I have
arrived you fox first words don't get
better than that by 1971 the first email
has been sent by 1973 the first
transatlantic connection is made then by
1978 Robert Khan and Vince Cerf have
designed TCP IP or transmission control
protocol Internet Protocol and if the
internet talks in the language this is
it by the 90s Tim berners-lee has kindly
invented the World Wide Web the retreat
evil of information architecture the
modern net is built on top of making
possible hypertext hyperlinks and the
first website you can still visit it
today and naturally comes the first
webcam it monitors a coffee machine at
Cambridge University for some reason
1980 3 the first graphical web browser
Mosaic and then the Moolah oh the Moolah
1994 and amazon.com makes his first
sales one of them notably to Bulgaria
for some books paid for in cash which is
sent over hidden inside a floppy disk so
the Customs inspectors won't steal it
clever as ever Bobby Bulgaria then enter
me and perhaps you 90s internet was
pretty weird a patchwork amalgamation of
misfiring search engines God or full
site design and if someone had the
audacity to phone your house all they
got was The Sound of the modem it was
[ __ ] great but stranger While most
technologists have been expecting a
robotics Revolution for the end of the
century what we got instead was a
Communications Revolution clearly
preferable since yeah the internet can't
fetch your tea but more importantly you
can't watch pornography on a robot and
really this is just one idiot's biased
Nostalgia for a simpler time but not a
few decades ago the Hope For What the
internet could do was Limitless most
societal issues surely stemmed from a
lack of information and with all human
knowledge at our fingertips we would all
eventually come to the same objective
conclusions emerge from division and
ignorance and draw together in peace as
a unified digital family
and that went so-so oh yeah Utopia must
be just over the hill now mate I can
almost see it oh no that's just my dad's
only fans account hey Dad what A Brave
New World we've built somehow Brave New
World in 1984 at the exact same time we
were promised the end of History we were
promised ultimate truth we're supposed
to be solving world hunger and building
Interstellar Starships what is chungus I
do not understand what have we done to
ourselves we've broken epistemology
itself sacrificed truth in favor of
mediated hyper reality and for what for
what what the [ __ ] is chungus
sorry we were supposed to be talking
about privacy weren't we well we're kind
of boned right now and to talk about
that we'll need a patronizingly simple
history of privacy which we've sort of
just done and some kind of beat
preferably a fat one
yep that'll do hey this is the
panopticon it's a prison design a guard
Tower sits at the center so the guard
can see all the inmates in a helpful 360
Panorama The Twist is that the prisoners
can't see into the tower and so never
know when they're being watched so they
may as well assume they're always being
watched the constant implication of
surveillance and what relevance could
this have as a modern metaphor we
already know that governments are
snooping on our digital lives with
impunity but it's not just States
playing that game we're now knee-deep in
a technological Moment The Thinker
shashana zubov calls surveillance
capitalism or rather turning the
internet into a data Mill for no fun and
lots of profit and it has the potential
not just to corrupt the future of the
internet but remove any possibility of
digital privacy ever again in the early
2000s the.com Bubble Burst this was a
problem for Silicon Valley because no
one quite knew how to monetize the
internet yet and that 17th personal
yacht ain't just gonna buy itself Google
was clever they noticed the courtesy of
all the searches they were providing
they were that on a massive Buffet of
data from and about their users lots of
that data could be used to optimize
Google itself but a huge amount was left
over and incidental which we may as well
call behavioral Surplus this was simple
stuffer firsts like noticing if a user
makes a lot of typos maybe that means
they're in a hurry or if they're
particularly diligent about apostrophes
maybe they're all bookish or whatever
but in a stroke of Walter White levels
of cunning Google realized they could
use this leftover information to
generate predictive patterns about a
user's moods and desires and create
absurdly well-targeted advertising and
the great googly moogly it worked it
made them Rich beyond all imagining and
the best part is it's free users gave
them their secrets for free in searches
now at this point no one is surprised
that if in a moment of 3 30 am whiskey
induced curiosity one searches willy
bigger how you will be bombarded for the
next 15 years with adverts for
questionable tonics and small weights on
Long strings kind of weird kinda
annoying but it's so much more Sinister
than that because as Google branched out
intermedia and email and navigation the
data points for Behavioral Surplus for
its user Secrets grew and grew the inner
lives of Google's users became its
primary resource a fully automated data
Mill extracting highly specific details
of a user's psychology and turning that
into big bucks via advertising and of
course the more data you collect about
users as in the more behavioral Surplus
you extract the more behavioral
correlations you can find and the more
efficient the game gets if I know that
you're trying to sell a wedding ring and
hire a divorce lawyer then I also know
you're probably at that point in your
life when it's a 95 vodka made from deck
chairs could sound appealing just been
for a run unrelatedly check out these
Amazing shoes contemplating turning your
life around would some deck chair vodka
help and other companies soon got in on
behavioral Surplus 2 because if you
throw Health trackers and digital
thermostats and smart cars into the mix
all of them collecting buckets of
personal data it's possible to build an
even more accurate model of your desire
players or just sell that information to
third parties one's commute route and
heart rate and sleep habits all
helpfully recorded and transmitted by
the one object that will probably stay
no more than a foot away from our bodies
for the rest of our lives data one
thought was one's own data that are
being sold on for staggering amounts of
money to the point that it is now an
economy in itself Brokers whose only job
is to sell an entire profile of you what
you eat what conditions you suffer from
voting habits sexual orientation your
secrets your secrets these obligate
[ __ ] carnivores as shashana zuboff
puts it you take something from someone
without their knowledge claim you own it
and then use it to become
unprecedentedly wealthy or you know
theft yeah but is it really theft if it
doesn't impact us on a day-to-day level
yes
yes yes there's a fun adage that if the
product is free then you're the product
but here it's more like you're the raw
material and there's no such thing as
too much data to those who want it
marital status level of Education
feelings regarding a recent game update
all of it is being fed into the system
decoding the black box of human desire
itself which is being cross-referenced
against ever more honed personality
models not just to advertise but to
scare and seduce in advance to make that
advertising even more effective BF
Skinner [ __ ] do you know what this is
son this is the panopticon constantly
implied surveillance and even better
surveillance is now being framed as just
how things are on the internet just
another mosquito on the digital Beach
it's fine all of the time and what else
is in the teachers of peaches and
privacy breaches well this is already
turning into an informational hostage
situation digital thermostats that will
stop updating their software if you
refuse to give the parent company your
usage data apps that conveniently forget
to mention by using them in the first
place you've tacitly agreed to pass on
your blood sugar level or details of a
menstrual cycle how the [ __ ] did we get
here it isn't that different to Abigail
Roberson's situation a hundred years ago
The Flower company took her physical
likeness for profit behavioral Surplus
is the harvesting and commodification of
our digital likenesses our data our
secrets for profit and if one's response
is well if you have nothing to hide you
have nothing to fear okay sounds great
but upon uttering that I hope you'll
allow your bathroom door to be removed
and to have live streaming thermal
cameras installed in which have a room
of the house you undertake the majority
of your sexy times because nothing to
hide nothing to fear right privacy isn't
about having somewhere to do drug deals
it's a basic tenet of modern human
living it is the right to be let alone
and we've only just codified it and we
may already be about to lose it if
companies can infer that we're bereaved
or pregnant or introverted or just going
through one of the many thousands of
Life crises humans enjoy during their
time as sentient meet well
simultaneously we know basically nothing
about how these companies are collecting
and using our data that that is an
egregious asymmetry a full wave
rectified data extraction panopticon
with the sole purpose of commodifying
our psychology of commodifying our
secrets now one obvious solution to this
is the restating of one's data as one's
personal property the problem with that
is that personal property can be sold
can become a commodity and your privacy
and your data are no more a commodity
than your right to free association or
Oxygen Plus behavioral Surplus isn't
just about an individual's data it's
about the data of groups and
demographics and things that can't be
personally owned but are terribly useful
as data points but whatever the solution
if we want to steer history away from
this waterfall it's going to take lots
of getting pissed off and if we don't do
something about this constantly
harvesting more and more behavioral
Surplus to keep the great data Mill
going will just be what the internet is
because that's how the next Generations
will grow up with it because the model
is already a massive part of the digital
economy later it will be the predominant
model and later will be too late we get
to decide now whether this was just a
historical blip like the rubber Barons
of the Gilded age or the shape of things
to come effectively killing privacy
forever
the Big Brother of surveillance has a
little brother called a surveillance
rather than being surveilled from the
top down systems watch from the bottom
up dashboard cameras for example
rebalancing the symmetry of Secrets by
watching the watches and maybe the best
fictional extreme of this ever written
is a Sci-Fi novel called the lights of
other days and I'm going to spoil a few
now since clearly you have nowhere
better to be and secondly because [ __ ]
you sometime in the nearest Future a
company cracks wormholes only the
wormholes are too small to send anything
through too small to see even but you
can peek inside so you can open a
wormhole anywhere on the planet and spy
on anyone on the planet without them
knowing and of course one of the main
uses immediately becomes surveilling
those more powerful watching the back
rooms of governments and corporations
which makes corruption very difficult
then things get rather strange when some
genius realizes if you put a time delay
on the thing you can see back into the
past anytime anywhere you can't
influence the past because the plot says
so but you can watch anything that ever
happened things do not go well Mass
outcry suicides every terrible thing
you've ever said is now immediately
available in 4k people watch their own
conceptions it gets weird but the next
Generations to grow up are a bit more
relaxed about it all because the
Wormhole technology is everywhere they
dress functionally and for fashion
rather than modesty because why cover
anything everyone has seen already they
have no concept of personal privacy but
as a consolation they also have no
concept of being surveilled by powerful
eyes unseen because the Watchers can
always be watched they've replaced the
panopticon with many panopticons 8
billion of them everyone is a watcher
the story ends with finding out human
life was seeded by sentient insectoids
bit left field but ultimately the
wormholes become a very strange way of
rebalancing the asymmetry of Secrets by
abolishing all secrets and it isn't that
much of a stretch to imagine we might
face a similar conundrum sometime soon
the smallest camera ever made weighs a
gram and is about the size of a grain of
sand the resolution is in Grace 200 by
200 pixels but that's enough to do some
decent spying and it's not like the
resolution won't get better and it's not
like this won't soon extend to drones
perhaps the size of gnats with full
audio and video capture and it's not
like they won't be Mass manufactured and
purchasable combine that with ever
increasing data storage combine that
with whatever brain machine interfaces
the next Generations will be messing
around with it's not hard to imagine we
might build a different kind of
panopticon one in which it's taken for
granted that you're probably being
watched that everything you've ever said
and done has been recorded and can be
accessed by anyone at any time and that
you can do the same at any time to
everyone you know a participatory an
Opticon now that sounds horrible
obviously like one long episode of bling
Empire there will be no escape from
every stupid slip of the tongue 20 years
ago potentially from every invasive
thought but the benefit of course is
that unless the powerful had
invisibility cloaks or lived in faradays
ages they would have to play the game
too no one would be exempt from the
participatory panopticon it's a very
strange kind of fair but a lot more fair
than the current Mill of asymmetrical
secrets we live in at the moment I don't
know man the road to hell is paved with
good inventions when it comes to
panopticons none is better than one but
one is a lot worse than 8 billion if
technology is going to semi-break
privacy anyway maybe better that it'd be
on our own terms 500 years ago there was
no way Gutenberg could have known just
how game-changing his printing press
would be likewise there's no way we can
even guess what the internet's
great-great-grandchild will look like
500 years from now digital telepathy
disembodied human consciousness itself
who knows but as all inventions do it
will bear the Hallmarks of whatever bad
habits its parents taught it when it was
little and we are teaching it some very
very bad habits and whatever it grows up
into it will be us who shapes that who
hopefully taught it that knowledge is
power but spying from Ivory Towers is
rude which means it'll also be us who
determine the digital landscape our
descendants grow up in and whether or
not that landscape is an equitable
Meadow or a digitized Victorian Mill
whether Enchanted water flows
unobstructed through the city listening
to us yes but impartially and replying
when asked to convey not only visions of
other possible cities and other possible
worlds but showing ourselves to
ourselves whether that water runs
unobstructed through the streets
bringing edification and information
reporting of the distant hopeful and
fabulous strange whether that water
flows down to the Estuary and sustains
those towering assiduous trees of
knowledge we grow over our heads one
great Forest Network across the
revolution World talking in all
languages of all things for all time
such that if Interstellar visitors
arrived a hundred years from now and
looked down upon the world and the
enchanted water and the forest we have
built that the forest might be so wise
and mighty they'd mistake the forest for
the true Steward of the planet and in
many ways considering how difficult it
was to build and how much it gave us in
return for building it it very well
might be
or whether instead the water is damned
and the Estuary drained and wet fog is
All That Remains of it fog that Waits
with Insidious ubiquity in every spot of
the house and mind one might once have
attempted to go and be alone in whether
that fog is Engineers to no longer speak
to us of distant places or possible
Futures but only forever listens with a
single omnipresent ear to our most
private hopes and phobias whether the
operation becomes so efficient that of a
dim evening one can step outside into
the gray Twilight and look out to the
roads which one knows beneath stream all
of one's secrets to look skyward a no
one's secrets are being dispatched to
ingenious silver Birds overhead
whereupon their blown-like pollen across
the entire globe and finally received
and Consolidated into perfectly ordered
data sets in far-flong and enormous
Halls where there resides a great Kraken
a kraken who does not sleep who does not
tire and is never full a kraken who
listens of all the dreams and secrets of
all those who live in the fog and
lovingly utilizes those dreams and
secrets for the production ever more
opulent Trinkets and wears a kraken so
saturated in secrets that it considers
the currents of the human heart and mind
no less manipulable than the diverting
of a stream or tilling of a field a
kraken that knows full well if Enchanted
water only listens then that isn't an
enchantment that's a curse that is a
[ __ ] hex oh yeah let's hex the water
that's a great idea that total
confiscation of privacy via corporate
surveillance the usurping of human
psychology via Opera and conditioning
the great end of History purchased and
delivered at the soonest convenience
whatever you want whatever you didn't
even know you wanted the only price
being standing epistemically naked
before digital Gods Who Remain forever
shrouded and the most diabolical part of
the door that we built the cage for
ourselves not even from some orwellian
will to control not even from some
stupid fear of the other or Terror in
face of our own Natures but simply to
make a buck to make a buck
[Music]
normally I would love to play you out
with some Carl Sagan ripoff rant about
how humans are great and wow Space is
really big Etc but we could screw
ourselves over so so royally with this
stuff to the point that the recovery of
human dignity becomes impossible that it
might be best not to end this one with
any false optimism
so hope you're doing Tip Top
boy